---
title: "Cell geometry modulates the activation of fibroblasts in 3D tumor microenvironments"
collection: talks
type: "Conference talks"
permalink: /talks/2020-01-15-talk
venue: "64th Annual Meeting of the Biophysical Society"
date: 2020-01-15
location: "San Diego, USA"
---

Talk and poster presentation at [64th Annual Meeting of the Biophysical Society](https://www.biophysics.org/2020meeting/program/)<br/><br/>

**Authors:** **Saradha Venkatachalapathy**,D.S.Johun,G.V.Shivashankar<br/><br/>
**Abstract** <br/>
In the tumor microenvironment, the stromal fibroblast population consists of subsets of cells that are
activated and promote tumor initiation and growth. The factors that contribute to such selective activation of
fibroblasts are not understood. Recent studies from our lab have highlighted the importance of cell mechanics
in modulating the transcriptional response to signals from the microenvironment. In this study, we assessed
the role of intrinsic cell geometric state in modulating fibroblast activation. To test this, we developed an
engineered 3D fibroblast tumor co-culture system and used high resolution images to quantify multiple
cell geometry sensitive nuclear morphological and chromatin organizational features. These features were
then mapped to activation levels as measured by the nuclear abundance of transcription cofactor, MKL
and protein levels of its target, αSMA. We observe the presence of activation-“primed” cell geometries that
present higher activation levels which are further enhanced in the presence of cancer cells. Further we
show that enriching the population of activation-primed cell geometric states by either increasing matrix
rigidity or micro-patterning primed cell shapes results in increased efficiency of fibroblast activation.
Collectively, these observations highlight the importance of cell mechanics in fibroblast activation within
the heterogenous tumor microenvironment.<br/>

[Poster](https://SaradhaVenkatachalapathy.github.io/files/Poster_annualBPS_2020.pdf)
